1. Git link
https://github.com/rocfd/git_handson

2. Docker Hub
Image "tidyr:latest"
tidyR package is dedicated to the manipulation and tidying of data.
https://hub.docker.com/layers/rocfadu95/epigenomics_uvic/latest/images/sha256-3977f935e9fc24a4a3b73b26d56322a71bf19dc5c2be315407a12a9a2acdc2c1?context=repo

3. Describe the workflow of a ChIP-seq experiment (experimental part)
The purpose of ChIP-seq experiments is to identify all the genomic locations associated to a 
transcription factor or a histone modification. As a summary, this technique uses antibodies
to detect a target protein bound to DNA and then isolates this DNA in order to sequence it.
The steps are the following: first, formaldehyide is used to covalently fix all DNA associated
proteins to DNA. Second, DNA surrounding proteins is cut to small fragments of 300bps. The protein
of interest and its corresponding DNA is purified using specific antibodies. Then, a second antibody
is used to capture those fragments bound to the specific antibody and the rest is discarded. 
At this stage, proteins are separated from DNA reversing the effects of formaldehyde using temperature.
This leads to a sample of DNA fragments that in the case of ChIP-SEQ will be resolved by sequencing.

4. Controls in ChIP-SEQ experiments
ChIP-seq experiments require controls to ensure an appropriate identification of enrichment signals. 
The main motifs that stress the need of control samples are to avoid false enrichment of open chromatin regions and 
platform-specific sequencing biases. The first can occur due to an heterogeneous DNA breakage during sonication, hence
open chromatinr regions are enriched in sonication samples compared to heterochromatic regions, which more tighlty packed,
result less accessible for shearing and become underrepresented. The second, the specific effects of the sequencing 
platform used have to be controlled. To this end, two possible types of control samples are available. One is "input DNA" 
is DNA from the same sample, which undergoes cross-linking and fragmentation but it is not immunopurified. A second option
is to use a mock antibody that targets a non-nuclear antigen. 

5. Explain at which stage of a ChIP-seq processing analysis and how we combine the information of ChIP and control reads.
Describe the output files we get if we are using the tool MACS2.

The ChIP sample and control sample reads are obtained via sequencing. Continously, in parallel the samples and the controls are 
mapped to the genome obtaining BAM files. These BAM files are then used to perform peak calling, the step where control
information will be compared to the ChIP sample in order to identify genome positions where the histone mark / transcription
factor is bound and enriched in the sample respect to teh control. The output files obtained using MACS2 are the following:
- Wiggle files or bigWig files (compressed version).
- BED files or bigBed files (compressed version).

The .bed files must contain three compulsory elements that are chromosome name, start position and end position. In the case of
peak caller outputs, the start and end positions refer to the limits of the peak. Besides, with MACS2 additional elements are
obtained such as a peak identifier, an integer for UCSC display and the relative position to peak start (relative summit). 
To provide statisticall meaning bed files also include fold-change values at peak summit, -log10p-values and -log10qvalues.
Finally, the strand info is included in the form of NA since in ChIP-seq experiments the strand cannot be determined.

The .wiggle files contain information at nucleotide-level regarding continous signals on pile-up signal (aligned reads after
shifting or read extension), fold-enrichment signal and p-value signal.

6. A pipeline is a workflow of ordered steps dedicated to solve a task.
In the case of ENCODE ChIP-seq includes the CHIP-seq experiment itself, the sequencing and corresponding obtention of FASTQ 
files. Then these are mapped to the reference genome leading to the obtention of BAM files. Controls wether they are from 
input origin or from a control IgG are also sequenced and mapped for them to be compared and confirm the marks in the sample.
Once mapped, the final step is peak calling. The peak calling consists on registering the genomic positions were the peaks are located (in bed or big bed files). Additionally, the fold-change signal is stored in wiggle files or bigWig files. 
Peak calling will be adapted wether the target are transcription factors (using SPP caller) or histone marks (using MACS2).

7. EN-TEx donor:
Filters:
Assay type: Undefined (all)
Assay title: Undefined (all)
Status: released.
Genome assembly: GRCh38.
Target category: unspecified.
Target of assay: unspecified.
Organism: Homo sapiens
Biosample classification: tissue
Biosample term name: stomach & sigmoid colon
All the remaing filters are default/unspecified.

b) 39 experiments fullfill the above filters.
c) https://www.encodeproject.org/metadata/?type=Experiment&replicates.library.biosample.donor.uuid=d370683e-81e7-473f-8475-7716d027849b&status=released&assembly=GRCh38&biosample_ontology.term_name=stomach&biosample_ontology.term_name=sigmoid+colon

8. Download the metadata retrieved in point 5. Parse it to get:
● File ID of bigWig file for fold-change over control in sigmoid_colon ATAC-seq
experiment.
● File ID of bigWig file for fold-change over control in stomach ATAC-seq experiment.
● Paste the code used and the corresponding IDs.

Sigmoid Colon
ENCFF997HHO

grep -F H3K4me3 metadata.tsv |\
awk 'BEGIN{FS=OFS="\t"; print "file_id\ttissue\ttarget" } $2=="bigWig" && $3=="fold_change_over_control" && $44!="GRCh38" {print $1, $7, $19}' > bigWig.FC.ids.txt

wget -P bigWig.files "https://www.encodeproject.org/files/ENCFF997HHO/@@download/ENCFF997HHO.bigWig"

Stomach
ENCFF415RKU

grep -F H3K4me3 metadata.tsv |\
awk 'BEGIN{FS=OFS="\t"; print "file_id\ttissue\ttarget" } $2=="bigWig" && $3=="fold_change_over_control" && $44!="GRCh38" {print $1, $7, $19}' > bigWig.FC.ids.txt

wget -P bigWig.files "https://www.encodeproject.org/files/ENCFF415RKU/@@download/ENCFF415RKU.bigWig"

9. What is an aggregation plot?
An aggregation plot is a representation of the distribution of a continous ChIP-seq signal (fold-change, p-value or pile-up)
over a determinate set of genomic coordinates.
● Which tool do we use to generate one? aggreagration.plot.R
● Which input data do we need? An aggreation plot takes the genomic coordinates from a .BED file and the ChIP-seq signal
targeted concatenated with the genomic positions of interest (provided in a .tsv file).
● Have a look at the aggregation plot done during the hands-on.
○ Are the plots consistent between the two tissues?
Both tissues show a bimodal distribution centered at the TSS, which is expectable due to the preference of H3K4me3 to locate
near the promoter and first exon. Hence, the results are consistent across the analyzed tissues.
○ Is this what you would expect, given the relationship between H3K4me3 and
gene expression?
H3K4 tri-methylation has been associated with active gene transcription. In this line, the results indicate clearly how
the 1000 most expressed genes present a higher fold-change ChIP-seq signal than the least expressed genes. These results
confirm the association between H3K4me3 and gene expression in stomach and sigmoid colon.
○ Why is it important to know the approximate location of a specific histone
mark with respect to the gene?
The function of histone marks depend on their relative position with respect to the gene, so the same mark can have
different functions depending on where it is located. In order to determine the role of a histone mark it is therefore
necessary not only to detect it but to annotate its relative position to circundant genomic elements.

10. What type of plot are we using to visualize the correlation between two variables?
● Have a look at the plots generated during the hands-on to assess the correlation
between expression and H3K4me3
○ Are these results consistent between the two tissues?
○ Would you expect this degree of correlation? Formulate an interpretation of
the results.

The plot to visualize the correlation is a scatter plot with H3K4me3 signal as Y axis and expression as X axis.

The correlation coefficients seem equiparable between tissues being for sigmoid colon Spearman 0.74 and Pearson 0.51
and for stomach Spearman 0.67 and 0.47. Hence, the results are consistent between tissues.

The histone mark H3K4me3 is related with active gene transcription. This mark is present around the TSS and tipically, its signal
adopts a narrow peak shape. Taking this information into account, a positive correlation between the presence of this mark and
gene expression should be expected. The present results indicate this positive correlation. However, a greater correlation
could be expected according to the strong link between the presence of this histone mark and active transcription in the literature.


11. During the hands-on session, we have checked the level of expression of genes with tissue-specific H3K4me3 marking.
● Are these results consistent with the degree of correlation we have observed in point 8?
● Do you observe any unexpected behavior?
● How would you relate the presence of genes with tissue-specific marking with the GO
terms obtained?

The expected trend to observe is that marked tissues show higher expression levels than unmarked tissues. This can be 
observed comparing the boxplots marked both tissues vs not marked. Clearly, marked tissues show greater expression levels.
It is also the case for tissue-specific marks where the target tissue shows a greater expression level than the counterpart.

The detection of expression on non-methylated instances (outliers) is rather unexpected since non-methylated H3K4 is associated with
silent transcription. However, the final transcription activity is susceptible to the added influence of many histone marks
and transcription factors that may make the absence of methylation in H3K4 not a crucial factor but rather an element that
favours silencing.

The GO terms obtained for sigmoid colon specifically marked genes are keratinization (GO:0031424), antimicrobial humoral response
(GO:0019730), detection of stimulus (GO:0051606), serotonin receptor signaling pathway (GO:0007210) and detection of external stimulus
(GO:0009581). Tissue-specific marks are related with tissue-specific expression of certain genes. These genes when enriched should
provide GO terms of specific BPs ocurring in the tissue. However, in our case the sigmoid colon GO terms the presence of keratinization
does not seem a colon-related process. Detection of external stimulus and simulus can be dedicated to the sensing that enterocytes
perform of the lumenal cavity. Finally, the activation of the serotonin receptor signaling pathway is related to the presence
of enterochromafiffin cells, which are the predominant site of serotonin syntesis (DOI: 10.1007/s10350-006-0763-3). 

12. Comment on the Venn diagram generated in the last task.
Generally, there are more peaks of the same type shared between different tissues than peaks of different type shared in the same tissue.
In the case of H3K4me3, the peaks shared between tissues add up to 14889. In the case of POLR2A, 5872 peaks are shared between tissues
Differently for stomach, the H3K4me3 and POLR2A peaks represent the lesser 6332 and for sigmoid colon the intersection is 9120. 
Although stomach and sigmoid colon are different tissues the expression of common genes can be accounted as the high amount of
ovelapping H3K4me3 positions. In the same line, POLR2A is a gene that codifies for the DNA-directed RNA polimerase II subunit RPB1,
which as the largest subunit of RNA pol II is in charge of mRNA sequencing. At an initial stage of transcription, when the polimerase
machinery is assembled around the TSS colocalization between POLR2A and H3K4me3 is reasonable and might explain the shared peaks
between this TF and H3K4me3.
